RLP wiki page (#232)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/EL/RLP.md

# Recursive-Length Prefix (RLP) Serialization

## Overview

> Recursive Length Prefix (RLP) is a core serialization protocol used within the Ethereum network to encode data. It is designed to serialize structured data, encompassing everything from transaction data to the entire state of the blockchain. This wiki page explores the internals of RLP, its encoding/decoding rules, tools available and its role in Ethereum's functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recursive Length Prefix (RLP) is a core serialization protocol used within the execution layer to encode data. It is designed to serialize data to produce a structure readable by all client software. It is used for everything from transaction data to the entire state of the blockchain. This wiki page explores the internals of RLP, its encoding/decoding rules, tools available and its role in Ethereum's functionality.
```
Just a suggestion, feel free to change this, just that the paragraph shouldn't miss these 2 information - it is primarily used in EL and it's used for parsing by Ethereum software

## Understanding Data Serialization in Ethereum

> ![Data Serialization](/docs/images/el-architecture/data-serialization.png)

Reviewer: The picture is nice to have but not sure if necessary because it only demonstrates a black box function. Stream of byes might also seem that encoding functions are not readable by human. Maybe I would just keep it in the paragraph below

Author: You are correct. The image here isn't adding a lot of value here. I will remove it for now.

_Figure: Data Serialization Flow_

Data serialization is the process of converting data structures or objects into a byte stream for storage, transmission, or later reconstruction. In distributed systems like Ethereum, serialization is crucial for transmitting data across network nodes reliably and efficiently. While common serialization formats include JSON and XML, Ethereum uses RLP due to its simplicity and effectiveness in encoding nested arrays of bytes.

## The Need for RLP in Ethereum

> RLP is intended to be a highly minimalistic serialization format; its sole purpose is to store nested arrays of bytes. Unlike protobuf, BSON and other existing solutions, RLP does not attempt to define any specific data types such as booleans, floats, doubles or even integers; instead, it simply exists to store structure, in the form of nested arrays, and leaves it up to the protocol to determine the meaning of the arrays.
> -- Ethereum's design rationale

> RLP is tailored for Ethereum to meet specific needs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RLP was created with Ethereum and is tailored to meet its specific needs:
```

- Minimalistic Design: It focuses purely on storing structure without imposing data type definitions.
- Consistency: It guarantees byte-perfect consistency across different implementations, crucial for the deterministic nature required in blockchain operations.

> ## RLP Encoding Rules

Reviewer: I would swap this paragraph with the following. Charts in "How RLP Algorithm works" section are very helpful and with more context introducing the chart be more useful than heavy reading of each rule which are documented elsewhere.

    B -->|0x00 to 0x7F| C[Direct Byte Output]
    B -->|0x80| D[Decode as Empty String/Null/False]
    B -->|0x81 to 0xB7| E[Short String]
    E --> F[Subtract 0x80 from First Byte to get Length]
    F --> G[Output Next 'Length' Bytes as String]
    B -->|0xB8 to 0xBF| H[Long String]
    H --> I[Subtract 0xB7 from First Byte to get Length Bytes Count]
    I --> J[Read Next 'Length Bytes Count' to Determine String Length]
    J --> K[Output Next 'String Length' Bytes as String]
    B -->|0xC0 to 0xF7| L[Short List]
    L --> M[Subtract 0xC0 from First Byte to get Total Encoded Length]
    M --> N[Decode Each Element in the Next 'Total Encoded Length' Bytes Recursively]
    B -->|0xF8 to 0xFF| O[Long List]
    O --> P[Subtract 0xF7 from First Byte to get Length Bytes Count]
    P --> Q[Read Next 'Length Bytes Count' to Determine List Total Length]
    Q --> R[Decode Each Element in the Next 'List Total Length' Bytes Recursively]
    C --> S[Output Decoded Data]
    D --> S
    G --> S
    K --> S
    N --> S
    R --> S
```

_Figure: RLP Decoding Flow_

## RLP Tools

There are many libraries available for RLP implementations in Ethereum. Here are few tools:

> - [Geth RLP](https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/tree/master/rlp)

Reviewer: Apart from the decoding library in geth, here is an actual tool for decoding https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/tree/master/cmd/rlpdump
